.TH FACEGATE 1 "May 2026" "Facegate 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
facegate \- native facial authentication for Linux, including automatic screen unlock
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY facegate
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.RI [ COMMAND ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B configure
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B setup
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.RI [ USERNAME ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B status
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B logs
.RI [ --lines " N" ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B doctor
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B cameras
.YS
.SY facegate
.B camera-test
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.RI [ --device " DEVICE" ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B add
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.I USERNAME
.RI [ --label " LABEL" ]
.RI [ --for " sudo|session|both" ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B session-auth
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B list
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.I USERNAME
.YS
.SY facegate
.B remove
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.I USERNAME
.I ID
.YS
.SY facegate
.B forget
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.RI [ -y " | " --yes ]
.I USERNAME
.YS
.SY facegate
.B test
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.I USERNAME
.YS
.SY facegate
.B calibrate
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.I USERNAME
.RI [ --for " sudo|session" ]
.RI [ --samples " N" ]
.RI [ --write ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B calibrate-cameras
.RI [ --config " PATH" ]
.RI [ --rgb-device " DEVICE" ]
.RI [ --ir-device " DEVICE" ]
.RI [ --samples " N" ]
.RI [ --write ]
.RI [ --enable ]
.YS
.SY facegate
.B completions
.I SHELL
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B facegate
is the command line and interactive terminal interface for Facegate, a native
Linux facial authentication stack backed by V4L2 cameras, ONNX Runtime face
detection, ArcFace-compatible embeddings, a PAM module, a D-Bus screen-lock
daemon, and \(em since v0.2.0 \(em a dedicated system broker daemon
.RB ( facegate-brokerd )
that owns all biometric templates and runs the match decision out-of-process
from user sessions.
.PP
Facegate provides two complementary authentication paths, both of which now
delegate matching to the broker:
.TP
.B PAM module
.IR pam_facegate.so
integrates with any PAM-aware service: sudo, su, login managers (SDDM, LightDM,
GDM, greetd), and screen lockers that call PAM on form submission. The module
spawns
.B facegate auth
as a subprocess. That subprocess captures a single camera frame, submits it
to
.B facegate-brokerd
over
.IR /run/facegate/broker.sock ,
and exits with the broker's decision. PAM succeeds immediately if the face
matches, then falls through to password authentication if it does not.
.TP
.B Watch daemon
.B facegate-watch.service
is a systemd user service that subscribes to the
.B Lock
signal on
.IR org.freedesktop.login1.Session .
The moment the screen locks, it opens the camera, captures frames, and
submits each one to
.B facegate-brokerd
for matching. On a successful match it calls the
.B Unlock()
D-Bus method on the session object directly \(em no keypress, no unlock form.
If recognition fails or the user types their password first, the camera is
released and the flow continues normally. Since v0.2.0 the watch daemon
itself no longer loads SCRFD or ArcFace models, no longer reads stored
templates, and no longer decides the match outcome \(em the broker does.
.PP
Running
.B facegate
without a subcommand opens the interactive TUI, which covers all configuration,
enrollment, diagnostics, and service management.
.PP
The default configuration file is
.IR /etc/facegate/config.toml .
Most commands read this file unless
.B --config
is supplied.
When Facegate writes the configuration through
.BR configure ,
.BR setup ,
.BR "calibrate --write" ,
or
.BR "calibrate-cameras --write" ,
it automatically starts or restarts
.B facegate-brokerd.service
so broker-side policy changes take effect immediately. If
.B facegate-watch.service
is already active for the invoking user, it is restarted as well.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B configure
Open the interactive terminal configuration editor. Adjust camera settings,
recognition thresholds, model paths, storage paths, logging, and PAM fallback
behavior. Press
.B Esc
to return to the previous screen or
.B q
to quit.
.TP
.B setup [\fIUSERNAME\fR]
Run a guided first-time setup flow. The flow recommends a camera, backs up the
configuration before writing changes, offers enrollment and recognition testing,
and then offers sudo/session PAM and watch-daemon activation. Each mutating
step asks for confirmation before it runs.
.TP
.B status
Print a compact, non-mutating status summary: config parse status, broker
socket health, selected camera, model file presence, template counts available
through the broker, PAM enablement, watch service state, and recent authorized
audit events. Runs without root and marks permission-limited checks clearly.
.TP
.B logs [\fB--lines\fR \fIN\fR]
Print the current user's local diagnostic log from
.IR ~/.local/state/facegate/facegate.log .
The log contains coarse local events such as camera open failures, capture
timeouts, broker errors, RGB+IR cross-check rejections, match scores, and
accept/reject outcomes. It does not contain images, embeddings, or enrolled
template vectors.
.TP
.B doctor
Run installation diagnostics. Checks the configuration file, PAM module,
storage directory, camera device, ONNX models, ONNX Runtime shared library,
and whether the
.B facegate-watch.service
unit file is installed.
.TP
.B cameras
Enumerate every
.I /dev/videoN
node, print its driver/card name and supported pixel formats, and
recommend the best device for face authentication. Devices that report
.BR GREY ", " Y8 ", or " Y800
are tagged as
.B IR
(infra-red) and preferred — they keep working in the dark and are much
harder to spoof than a colour stream. Devices that only report
.BR YUYV " or " MJPG
are tagged as
.BR RGB .
.B cameras
runs without root.
.TP
.B camera-test
Open the configured camera, negotiate a supported pixel format, capture one
frame, run the face detector, and report whether a face was detected.
.RS
.TP
.BI --device " DEVICE"
Override the configured camera device for this run only, for example
.IR /dev/video0 .
.RE
.TP
.B add \fIUSERNAME\fR [\fB--label\fR \fILABEL\fR] [\fB--for\fR \fIsudo|session|both\fR]
Enroll face templates for
.IR USERNAME .
Requires root. Templates are stored under
.IR /var/lib/facegate/users .
.PP
.RS
The default target is
.BR sudo ,
which requires
.I USERNAME
to have sudo privileges.
Use
.B --for session
for login and screen-lock authentication, or
.B --for both
to cover all flows in a single enrollment.
.PP
Templates are scoped: a session-only template is rejected for sudo
authentication and vice versa.
.B --for both
is accepted by all flows.
.PP
Enrolled templates are owned by the dedicated
.B facegate
system user and accessed through
.BR facegate-brokerd .
User-facing commands receive metadata or match decisions, not raw enrolled
embedding vectors.
.RE
.TP
.B session-auth
Toggle
.B pam_facegate.so
in supported login/session PAM service files found on the system.
Auto-detected services include
.BR login ,
.BR gdm-password ,
.BR gdm3 ,
.BR gdm ,
.BR sddm ,
.BR lightdm ,
.BR greetd ,
.BR kde ,
.BR gnome-screensaver ,
.BR swaylock ,
.BR hyprlock ,
.BR i3lock ,
and
.BR vlock .
.PP
.RS
Additional service files can be specified with
.B --pam-service
or
.BR --pam-file .
After enabling, the output reminds you to also enable the watch daemon for
automatic screen-lock unlock.
.RE
.TP
.B emergency-disable
Restore clean Facegate PAM backups where possible, remove remaining
.B pam_facegate.so
lines from
.IR /etc/pam.d ,
and stop Facegate services for emergency password-auth recovery.
Use
.B --dry-run
to preview the rollback plan without changing files or services.
.TP
.B broker status
Show broker systemd state, IPC socket health, protocol/version, audit log size,
and storage/socket permissions.
.TP
.B broker health
Ping
.B facegate-brokerd
over IPC and print the broker version and protocol version.
.TP
.B broker restart
Restart
.BR facegate-brokerd.service .
.TP
.B broker logs
Show recent
.B facegate-brokerd.service
journal lines. Use
.B --lines
to choose the number of lines.
.TP
.B broker repair-permissions
Re-apply
.B facegate:facegate
ownership and private modes to
.IR /var/lib/facegate/users
and
.IR /var/lib/facegate/audit.log .
.TP
.B users
List enrolled users through the broker, including template count, scopes,
first/last enrollment timestamps, and ownership/mode state for each user's
template directory and
.IR embeddings.json .
Use
.B --json
for script-friendly output.
.TP
.B list \fIUSERNAME\fR
List enrolled templates for
.IR USERNAME ,
including IDs, scopes, creation timestamps, and labels.
.TP
.B remove \fIUSERNAME\fR \fIID\fR
Remove one enrolled template by ID. Requires root.
.TP
.B forget \fIUSERNAME\fR [\fB-y\fR | \fB--yes\fR]
Remove every enrolled template for
.IR USERNAME
in one operation. Lists the templates that will be deleted and asks for
confirmation by default; pass
.B --yes
to skip the prompt (useful for scripted resets during testing). Each
removal goes through the broker so the audit log records the action.
Requires root.
.TP
.B test \fIUSERNAME\fR
Capture a live face embedding and compare it against all enrolled templates for
.IR USERNAME .
Prints the best cosine similarity score, the configured threshold, and an
ACCEPT or REJECT result.
.TP
.B calibrate \fIUSERNAME\fR [\fB--for\fR \fIsudo|session\fR] [\fB--samples\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB--write\fR]
Capture multiple live positive samples, compare each probe through the broker,
print the observed score distribution, and recommend a recognition threshold.
The recommendation is the lowest observed positive score minus a fixed safety
margin. Calibration never overwrites enrolled templates. With
.BR --write ,
Facegate asks for confirmation before backing up the config and writing the
recommended value to
.BR recognition.threshold .
.TP
.B calibrate-cameras [\fB--rgb-device\fR \fIDEVICE\fR] [\fB--ir-device\fR \fIDEVICE\fR] [\fB--samples\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB--write\fR] [\fB--enable\fR]
Capture synchronized RGB+IR pairs, detect SCRFD landmarks in both streams, and
estimate the IR-to-RGB homography used by
.BR [camera.cross_check] .
The command defaults to
.B camera.device
for RGB and
.B camera.ir.device
for IR. It prints RMS and maximum reprojection error. With
.BR --write ,
Facegate asks for confirmation before backing up the config and writing
.BR camera.device ,
.BR camera.ir.device ,
and
.BR camera.cross_check.homography .
Add
.B --enable
to also set
.BR camera.cross_check.enabled=true .
Test the result with
.B facegate test
before enabling PAM on a strict setup.
.TP
.B completions \fISHELL\fR
Print shell completion scripts to stdout. Supported shells:
.BR bash ,
.BR zsh ,
.BR fish ,
.BR elvish ,
.BR powershell .
.TP
.B auth --user \fIUSERNAME\fR [\fB--service\fR \fISERVICE\fR]
Internal command invoked by the PAM module. Hidden from normal help output.
Returns machine-readable exit codes. Users should run
.B test
instead.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --config " PATH"
Read configuration from
.I PATH
instead of
.IR /etc/facegate/config.toml .
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show command help.
.TP
.B -V, --version
Show the Facegate version.
.SH SCREEN LOCK DAEMON
.SS Enabling the watch daemon
After enrolling with
.B --for session
or
.BR --for both ,
enable the watch daemon once as your normal user:
.PP
.RS
.EX
systemctl --user enable --now facegate-watch
.EE
.RE
.PP
The service is declared
.B WantedBy=graphical-session.target
and will start automatically at every subsequent login.
You can also toggle it from the Facegate TUI (select
.BR "Watch Daemon" ).
.SS How it works
.IP 1. 4
The daemon starts at login and connects to the system D-Bus.
.IP 2. 4
It retrieves the current session object path from
.B org.freedesktop.login1.Manager.GetSession(\fIXDG_SESSION_ID\fP)
and subscribes to the
.B Lock
and
.B Unlock
signals on that object.
.IP 3. 4
When the screen locks (
.B Lock
signal), the daemon opens the camera using the session ACLs that
.B systemd-logind
automatically grants to the active session owner via udev rules. No extra
group membership is required.
.IP 4. 4
It captures camera frames in a background thread, submits each one to
.B facegate-brokerd
through
.IR /run/facegate/broker.sock ,
and waits for the broker's match decision. The daemon itself does not load
templates and does not run SCRFD or ArcFace. Up to
.B max_attempts
frames are submitted before the daemon gives up.
.IP 5. 4
On a successful match it calls
.BR org.freedesktop.login1.Session.Unlock() .
On timeout or repeated failure it releases the camera and lets the user
authenticate normally.
.IP 6. 4
If the
.B Unlock
signal fires first (user typed their password), the daemon cancels any
ongoing scan immediately and releases the camera.
.SH PAM SETUP
.SS Enabling via the TUI
Run
.B sudo facegate
and select
.B Sudo Auth
to add or remove
.B pam_facegate.so
from
.IR /etc/pam.d/sudo .
Select
.B Session Auth
to toggle it for detected login/session services.
.SS Manual setup
Add the following line to the relevant PAM service file,
.B before
the existing
.B auth
lines:
.PP
.RS
.EX
auth      sufficient    /usr/lib/security/pam_facegate.so
.EE
.RE
.PP
The absolute path is intentional: it is the only spelling that works on every
distribution Facegate targets, including Debian / Ubuntu (which search
.IR /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/security )
and Fedora
.RI ( /usr/lib64/security ).
The bare-name form
.B pam_facegate.so
only works on distros whose PAM search path matches our install dir.
.PP
.B Warning:
always keep a root shell open while editing PAM configuration. A broken PAM
configuration can lock you out of
.BR sudo ,
login, or screen unlock.
.SS Scope of PAM vs. the watch daemon
The PAM module is called when the user initiates authentication: running
.BR sudo ,
pressing Login at SDDM, or submitting the unlock form. For fully automatic
screen unlock (camera starts as soon as the screen locks, no user interaction),
use the watch daemon instead. Both mechanisms can coexist: PAM provides a
face-scan fallback even when the watch daemon is not running, while the daemon
provides the no-keypress experience when it is.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file is TOML. The default path is:
.PP
.RS
.I /etc/facegate/config.toml
.RE
.PP
.TP
.B [camera]
Primary (RGB) camera device and capture settings. Common fields:
.BR device ,
.BR width ,
.BR height ,
.BR fps ,
.BR warmup_frames ,
.BR timeout_ms .
.IP
On Windows-Hello-style hardware,
.B device
should normally point at the RGB webcam and a separate
.B [camera.ir]
section should point at the IR sensor (typically
.IR /dev/video2 " or " /dev/video4 ).
Run
.B facegate cameras
to discover which node is which on your laptop.
.TP
.B [camera.ir]
Optional IR sensor used by the RGB+IR cross-check. The only required field is
.BR device .
Every other field
.RB ( width ,
.BR height ,
.BR fps ,
.BR timeout_ms ,
.BR warmup_frames ,
.BR min_face_size )
is an override that defaults to an IR-friendly value when omitted (longer
warmup/timeout, 5/8\(mu the RGB
.BR recognition.min_face_size ).
.TP
.B [camera.cross_check]
Optional RGB+IR presentation-attack defence. When
.B enabled
is true,
.B [camera.ir]
must be configured. The client captures RGB and IR frames in parallel and
submits the pair to the broker, which rejects the probe if the timestamps
differ by more than
.B max_time_skew_ms
or the IR face does not map (via
.BR homography )
to within
.B max_position_offset_px
of the RGB face. The IR stream provides a
.B liveness
signal (face presence + spatial alignment); identity matching is done on the
RGB embedding alone. Common fields:
.BR enabled ,
.BR max_time_skew_ms ,
.BR max_position_offset_px ,
.BR homography ,
.BR allow_identity_homography .
Use
.B facegate calibrate-cameras
to estimate
.B homography
from live RGB+IR landmark pairs; the default identity matrix is refused
unless
.B allow_identity_homography
is true.
.TP
.B [recognition]
Recognition policy:
.BR threshold " (cosine similarity, higher = stricter),"
.BR required_matches ,
.BR max_attempts ,
.BR min_face_size .
.B recognition.sudo
and
.B recognition.session
may override
.BR threshold ,
.BR required_matches ,
and
.BR max_attempts
per authentication scope. The default sudo policy is stricter
.RB ( threshold=0.60 ,
.BR required_matches=2 ,
.BR max_attempts=5 )
than session unlock.
.TP
.B [models]
Paths to the ONNX detector and embedder models. Defaults are under
.IR /usr/share/facegate/models .
.TP
.B [storage]
Template storage directory. Default:
.IR /var/lib/facegate/users .
.TP
.B [security]
.BR allow_password_fallback " — whether PAM falls through to password auth on non-match (default: true)."
.br
.BR deny_on_camera_error " — whether a camera failure counts as auth failure (default: false, falls through)."
.br
.BR cooldown_after_failures " — failed match attempts before temporary cooldown (default: 10)."
.br
.BR cooldown_seconds " — cooldown duration in seconds (default: 60)."
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/bin/facegate
Facegate command line interface.
.TP
.I /usr/bin/facegate-brokerd
System broker daemon. Owns all enrolled templates, runs face detection /
embedding / matching, and exposes match decisions over a local Unix socket.
Started as the
.B facegate
system user by
.BR facegate-brokerd.service .
.TP
.I /usr/lib/security/pam_facegate.so
PAM module. Loaded by PAM at authentication time. Spawns
.B facegate auth
as a subprocess; does not link ONNX Runtime.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/facegate-brokerd.service
systemd system unit that starts
.BR facegate-brokerd .
Includes a hardened sandbox profile
.RB ( NoNewPrivileges ,
.BR MemoryDenyWriteExecute ,
.BR ProtectProc=invisible ,
seccomp, AF_UNIX only, no capabilities, no network).
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/user/facegate-watch.service
systemd user service unit for the screen-lock watch daemon.
.TP
.I /etc/facegate/config.toml
Default configuration file.
.TP
.I /usr/share/facegate/models/scrfd_500m.onnx
Default face detector model (SCRFD 500M). Loaded by
.BR facegate-brokerd .
.TP
.I /usr/share/facegate/models/arcface_w600k_r50.onnx
Default face embedding model (ArcFace W600K R50). Loaded by
.BR facegate-brokerd .
.TP
.I /run/facegate/broker.sock
Local Unix socket exposed by
.BR facegate-brokerd .
Mode
.BR 0660 ,
owned
.BR facegate:facegate .
Peer credentials are verified via
.BR SO_PEERCRED .
Created by systemd as
.B RuntimeDirectory
on every boot.
.TP
.I /var/lib/facegate/users/\fIUSERNAME\fP/embeddings.json
Stored face templates for a user. Permissions: 0600, owned by
.BR facegate:facegate
(not by
.IR USERNAME ).
Read and written only by the broker.
.TP
.I /var/lib/facegate/audit.log
Local JSONL audit log written by the broker. Permissions: 0600, owned by
.BR facegate:facegate .
Contains timestamp, username, auth scope, coarse outcome, and coarse reason.
It does not contain images, embeddings, similarity scores, or any
score-derived data.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/facegate/facegate.log
Per-user diagnostic log written by the CLI, PAM helper, and watch daemon.
Permissions: 0600, owned by the local user. This file is intended for
troubleshooting by the user and can be viewed with
.BR "facegate logs" .
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Open the interactive menu:
.EX
sudo facegate
.EE
.TP
Check the installation:
.EX
sudo facegate doctor
.EE
.TP
Test the configured camera:
.EX
sudo facegate camera-test
.EE
.TP
Test a specific camera device:
.EX
sudo facegate camera-test --device /dev/video1
.EE
.TP
Enroll the current user for all auth flows:
.EX
sudo facegate add "$USER" --for both
.EE
.TP
List enrolled templates:
.EX
sudo facegate list "$USER"
.EE
.TP
Run a live recognition test:
.EX
sudo facegate test "$USER"
.EE
.TP
Enable PAM for login and screen lock services:
.EX
sudo facegate session-auth
.EE
.TP
Enable the screen-lock watch daemon (as your normal user):
.EX
systemctl --user enable --now facegate-watch
.EE
.TP
Check whether the daemon is running:
.EX
systemctl --user status facegate-watch
.EE
.TP
Generate zsh completions:
.EX
facegate completions zsh
.EE
.SH SECURITY NOTES
.SS General posture
Facegate is a
.B convenience authentication mechanism.
It is designed to reduce friction for everyday operations \(em unlocking your
screen, running sudo \(em without replacing the security of a strong password.
Password authentication always remains available unless you explicitly set
.B allow_password_fallback\ =\ false
in the configuration.
.PP
Facegate does not implement liveness detection. A high-quality photograph of the
enrolled user may fool the recognition pipeline depending on the camera, model,
and threshold setting. For high-security contexts, treat face auth as a
convenience first factor and do not disable password fallback.
.SS No network, no cloud
All processing happens on the local machine. Face detection and embedding
extraction run entirely within ONNX Runtime. No image, embedding, biometric
hash, or identity data is ever sent over the network. There is no telemetry,
no licensing server, and no cloud dependency.
.SS Trust boundary: the broker
Since v0.2.0 the authentication trust boundary lives inside
.BR facegate-brokerd ,
a dedicated system daemon running as the unprivileged
.B facegate
system user. Clients (the PAM helper, the watch daemon, the CLI) never read
enrolled templates and never decide match outcomes; they only capture frames
and submit them through
.BR MatchFrame .
The legacy
.B Match
endpoint (probe-embedding in, decision out) is restricted to
.BR uid=0 ,
which closes the synthetic-embedding bypass that was available to any
same-UID process under v0.1.0. Probe embeddings and decoded frame bytes are
zeroised after each match, and the broker rejects frames whose declared
geometry exceeds 4096\(mu4096 or whose buffer length disagrees with
.IR "width \(mu height \(mu bytes-per-pixel" .
Peer credentials on the socket are verified via
.BR SO_PEERCRED ;
the broker applies per-UID and per-username rate limiting and lockouts.
.SS Template storage
ArcFace templates are 512-dimensional floating-point vectors derived from face
images. They are not photographs, but they are sensitive biometric data.
Published model-inversion and template-inversion techniques can sometimes
produce face-like images or transferable biometric artifacts from embeddings,
so Facegate treats templates as secrets.
.PP
Templates are stored in
.IR /var/lib/facegate/users/USERNAME/embeddings.json
with
.B 0600
permissions owned by the
.B facegate:facegate
system user/group \(em
.B not
by the enrolled user. Only the broker reads or writes the file. A normal user
process (including code running as the enrolled user) can only request a match
decision via
.BR MatchFrame ;
it cannot read its own ArcFace vector. All writes are atomic: the broker writes
to a temporary file, calls
.BR fsync (2),
and renames it over the destination so that no partial state can persist across
a power failure. Symlink traversal is blocked on every file operation. Template
sealing to platform state (TPM) is not yet implemented; tracked in
.IR docs/security-issues/07-tpm-sealing.md .
.SS PAM module design
.IR pam_facegate.so
is deliberately minimal. It does not link ONNX Runtime, does not load models,
does not open the camera, and does not speak the broker protocol. When called
by PAM, it sends an informational message through the application's
conversation function, then spawns
.B /usr/bin/facegate auth --user NAME
as a subprocess and reads its exit code. A hard timeout of 25 seconds (reduced
from 45 s in v0.1.0) ensures PAM is never blocked indefinitely. The subprocess
approach keeps the security surface of the PAM module small and makes it
independently auditable.
.SS Watch daemon attack surface
.B facegate-watch
has no listening socket of any kind. It cannot be reached over the network,
over a Unix domain socket, or through any other IPC mechanism. Its only input
channel is D-Bus signals received from the system bus.
.PP
.B D-Bus signal authenticity.
The
.B Lock
and
.B Unlock
signals that trigger or cancel a recognition scan are emitted by
.IR org.freedesktop.login1 ,
the well-known service name owned exclusively by systemd-logind (root process).
The system D-Bus daemon enforces exclusive name ownership: no unprivileged
process can claim or impersonate this name. Signal sender identity is verified
using kernel socket credentials
.RB ( SO_PEERCRED ),
which cannot be spoofed from user space. A process running as a different user,
or even as root in a different context, cannot inject a fake
.B Lock
signal that would cause the daemon to start a scan.
.PP
.B Unlocking.
When a face matches, the daemon calls
.B org.freedesktop.login1.Session.Unlock()
on the D-Bus object for the current session. polkit authorises this call
because the caller is the owner of the session (same UID, same
.BR XDG_SESSION_ID ).
A process in a different session or running under a different UID cannot call
.B Unlock()
on someone else's session.
.PP
.B Camera access.
The daemon runs as the logged-in user within their active logind session.
systemd-logind and udev automatically grant the active session owner access to
.I /dev/video*
through filesystem ACLs at session activation time. Membership in the
.B video
group is
.B not
required and is
.B not
added by Facegate. This is the standard Linux session-device permission model,
the same one used by PipeWire and other session-aware daemons.
.PP
.B Same-UID attacker.
If an attacker already has code execution as the same user, the session is
already compromised in many ways: they have camera access, D-Bus access, and
filesystem access to everything the user owns. However, as of v0.2.0 they
do
.B not
have read access to enrolled templates (which now live under
.BR facegate:facegate )
and they cannot fabricate a match by submitting a precomputed embedding (the
.B Match
endpoint is restricted to
.BR uid=0 ;
.B MatchFrame
requires a real camera frame). The broker also enforces per-UID rate limits.
The watch daemon adds no fundamental attack surface beyond what an attacker
in the user session already has.
.SS Comparison with Windows Hello
Windows Hello uses
.BR WinBioSvc ,
a privileged biometric service running as
.B SYSTEM
with hardware-backed protections to keep biometric templates outside normal
user processes and to bind matching to live camera frames.
.PP
As of v0.2.0, Facegate has reached the first of those two properties: a
dedicated system daemon
.RB ( facegate-brokerd )
owns all templates, normal user processes cannot read enrolled vectors, and
matching only happens broker-side after the broker has received a frame from
the client.
.PP
What is
.B not
yet equivalent to Windows Hello:
.IP \(bu 4
.B Liveness / presentation attack detection.
A high-quality photograph or replay can still match a single-camera capture.
Tracked in
.IR docs/security-issues/06-liveness-pad.md .
.IP \(bu 4
.B Dual-stream RGB+IR cross-check.
Tracked in
.IR docs/security-issues/09-dual-camera-cross-check.md ,
planned for v0.3.0.
.IP \(bu 4
.B TPM sealing of templates at rest.
Tracked in
.IR docs/security-issues/07-tpm-sealing.md .
.IP \(bu 4
.B Broker-side frame acquisition.
Windows Hello captures frames inside its privileged service; the Facegate
broker runs
.B PrivateDevices=yes
and instead receives frames from clients. A same-UID attacker can therefore
submit a frame, but the frame must still pass detection and matching
server-side. Closing this gap requires the liveness PAD work above.
.SS Recommendations
.IP \(bu 4
Keep
.B allow_password_fallback\ =\ true
while testing and in all production deployments unless you have a specific reason
to disable it. Face recognition can fail under poor lighting, camera failure, or
model limitations; the password is always the safety net.
.IP \(bu 4
Enroll multiple samples (3 or more) under realistic lighting conditions.
.IP \(bu 4
Use a threshold of 0.55 or higher to reduce false accept risk.
.IP \(bu 4
Do not share enrolled templates between users or machines \(em each enrollment
is specific to the camera, lighting environment, and individual.
.IP \(bu 4
If someone else's face repeatedly triggers recognition, increase the threshold
or re-enroll.
.IP \(bu 4
Always keep a root shell open when modifying PAM configuration.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B facegate
returns zero on successful user-facing commands and non-zero on errors.
.PP
The hidden
.B auth
subcommand returns fixed codes consumed by the PAM module:
0 (face recognised), 1 (not recognised, fall through), 6 (access denied), and
non-zero for internal errors.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pam (8),
.BR sudo (8),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR loginctl (1),
.BR v4l2-ctl (1),
.BR org.freedesktop.login1 (5)
